Hey, it's Michael. All this week, The
Daily is revisiting some of our favorite
episodes of the year, listening back and
hearing what's happened in the time
since they first ran. Today, we return
to the subject of President Trump's
broad and historic crackdown on
immigration.
To reach his promised deportation
numbers, Trump increasingly sought to
deport those without a criminal record.
Those who came to the US decades ago and
who have established lives, careers, and
family in this country. Daily producer
Jessica Chung told the story of one such
man who was detained this year through
the eyes of his daughter. It's Tuesday,
December 30th. So, I was in class. I was
about to turn in all my work to the
teacher. So, I was already starting to
pack up my things slowly and I got a
call from my mom. [music]
She seemed very down. And she was like,
it's like when you hear somebody,
they're trying not to cry, but like
they're really like holding it in.
[music]
And I could hear in her voice, and
that's when I started to get a little
bit worried. and she told me that like
your father got detained
and it's just like you just start
envisioning the worst like he's in this
terrible place. This is a hardworking
man. No criminal record. Like you guys
just took him. [music]
I first spoke to Isa back in February.
This was a month into the Trump
administration which had promised quick
and mass deportations.
I was calling immigration lawyers around
the country trying to get a sense of who
exactly was getting targeted for
deportation and how ICE was finding
them. And that's when a lawyer called me
back saying you got to talk to Isa.
>> Hello.
>> Hi.
>> Hi. So, this is Jessica. This is Aya.
She's Fabrico's 20year-old daughter.
>> Okay, great. Nice to meet you.
>> Nice to meet you, too. My name is Isa
Gomez. Right now, Isa is a sophomore at
Wentworth Institute of Technology in
Massachusetts where she's studying
architecture and interior design. She
was raised in a town called SUS just
outside Boston where days before we had
talked, her dad was detained by ICE
officers. Tell me a little bit about
your dad. What is his name? How old is
he? And what does he do?
>> My dad, he's Fabricio Gomez. He is 47
years old and he works at a construction
company of his own.
>> Isa told me in 2001 her dad had settled
here in Massachusetts as an undocumented
immigrant. He'd come here from Brazil.
This was 3 years before Isa was born.
Um, tell me about why he left Brazil.
>> Sorry, I'm just asking like these
questions for my mom. the America.
>> So, um, my mom said it was due to the
violence down there and like he couldn't
make a living for himself, let alone
have a family down there.
>> When he first got here, he lived with
his aunt who was already here. But
eventually, he met Isa's mom who was
also from Brazil.
>> They actually walked into each other and
they were like, "Oh my god, like I
remember you, blah, blah, blah."
>> And they moved out on their own with
money Friio made by working in
construction. So he had been working
like small jobs almost like a handyman.
And then he met somebody which is my
dad's old boss that [music] still
remains in our life, Ken. And he slowly
taught my dad how to [music]
work. It went from like changing door
panels, windows to [music]
fixing inside the house and then it went
to roofing until he gathered up all his
knowledge that he had and then that's
when he decided that he was ready to
open his company and start creating a
life for himself and our family.
>> And is your sense that [music] he loves
his job?
>> Yes, my dad is actually very passionate
for his job. You would think he wouldn't
be because you're constantly going up a
ladder. It's so cold since we live in
Massachusetts
and it's really a hard job. [music]
>> Even though he wasn't fluent in English,
>> he had this way of connecting with
people.
>> My dad, he's always talked to his
clients like he knew them for so long. I
don't know how he talks to them like
everybody understands him.
>> For as long as she can remember, I
wanted to be just like him. [music] As a
little kid, I was like my dad's kind of
tomboy. I'd always buy construction
little kids kit and I would always go
around the house with like plastic
[music] toys.
Me and my dad are the type of person
where we take something that is not good
and we reform it. When something's not
designed properly, it just feels down.
And when you reform it, it brings
another life. It sounds like you and
your dad shared a special bond over your
love of building things.
>> Yes, I always wanted to work with my
dad, which is why I went to college for
architecture and interior design, so
eventually in the future I could work
with my dad's company.
>> Isa says her dream is that her dad's
company becomes a family company with
her. His dream was always for us to go
to college and pursue something that we
have passion for because they weren't
able to choose their own path. You're
not born saying, "I'm going to clean
toilets. I'm going to be a contractor."
You're born thinking like, "I want to be
a businesswoman. I want to have my own
company. I want to have my own home."
And it's just like that's what their
main goal for us was that we're able to
choose our own path. My dad, he's always
been the person to tell us work hard.
Nothing's gifted. Nothing's handed. Go
after it.
>> So, fast forward to today. The dream
that you described your dad having for
you guys was in progress. Like, you're
in college. Your dad is working hard at
a business that he owns. When Trump was
inaugurated on January 20th, did your
family have conversations about what
precautions you guys would take given
that he was aggressively pursuing people
without documentation.
>> I would always ask my dad like, "Should
we worry?" And he'd always tell us like,
"No, like there's don't worry." As much
as obviously when I'm alone, you always
have that thought in the back of your
mind like what am I going to do? What if
things go down?
>> Fabricio had no criminal record and he
didn't want to hide from law
enforcement. He wanted to do things the
right way. He's had a pending
application for a visa. In the meantime,
he's been checking in with ICE. He's
been doing that for 12 years. In
February, just one month after Trump's
inauguration, he was due for another
check-in. So he just shows up for his
yearly check-in and you go there, you
represent yourself, talk about whatever
is being asked, and that was about it.
[music]
And so her dad shows up to his check-in
like he always does. And it was soon
[music] after that that her mom called
her in class, notifying Isla that her
dad had been detained.
>> I was [music] hyperventilating. I felt
like my heart just left my chest.
I think about him being there. I think
about him being in this close-up space.
So, I worry a lot at night. Like, what
if he's panicking and we don't know?
What if he's holding strong, but [music]
he's actually having the hardest time of
his life? Like, that's what constantly
replays in my head. [music]
So, it just felt like my whole heart got
ripped out of my chest because I never
got to really say a proper goodbye, like
I'll see you later. [music]
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Isa's dad was detained on February 26th.
He was taken to the Plymouth County
Correctional Facility about an hour's
drive away from their home. Eventually,
Isa was able to reach him on the phone.
>> I'll give it to my dad. From the first
day that he called us to speak to us,
that man has holding strong. He has the
most positive energy and so positive
that he will see us and things will go
back to not normal because I don't feel
like anybody could really treat life as
normal after this situation, but
definitely better. Isa's dad told her to
hold strong, too. He said the detention
center wasn't so bad. He told her he'd
gotten a job cleaning, which allowed
more time outside of his cell. He
started a Bible study with a group of
other detainees
>> and he was allowed visitors.
>> I'm the only one eligible to visit
because I'm over 18, but he told me like
as much as I would love to see you guys
so much, just don't come here because
this is not the person that I am and it
would hurt to see you get up from that
chair and turn your back and have to
leave.
But as the days in custody turn into
weeks, the two of them adapted to a new
version of the relationship. No visits.
>> They talk on the phone a lot as often as
five times a day.
>> We open every conversation like
he was here with us. Like I'm walking
into the house saying hi to him. Ba. Hi
dad. How are you? I missed you. We
continue life's how it is on the phone.
I gave him updates on my grades. I gave
him updates on my finals. Well, I can't
show to him my projects since they're
all like online based cuz they're all
like floor plans, stuff like that. But I
like give him the visual analysis.
[music]
These calls went on for two months and
then in April, Isla learned of two major
developments. First, ICE was going to
enforce an order of removal against her
dad, which meant he could be deported
immediately.
Second, ICE was moving him over 1,600 m
to a notorious detention center in
Louisiana, which had been investigated
by the Department of Homeland Security
for alleged abuses. Isa says her dad's
new detention center in Pine Perry,
Louisiana, is nothing like the one in
Plymouth.
>> It's quite literally a prison where
people that actually committed real
crimes would be in. Like he's in a jail
cell where it's just like 10 times
worse.
>> Things feel different.
>> She senses that the brave face her dad
had put on is starting to crack.
>> I don't want to say he's in full panic,
but he's really feeling it. Even so on
the phone like I can hear himself let
go.
>> And this change in mood is starting to
have an impact on Isa too. There's
something wrong. My anxiety has been
over the roof. It just feels like it's
so hard to get through your day. It's so
hard. Like
>> you cannot tell me they'll be taking my
dad and he will be in Brazil for the
next 10 years up until we can reapply
for him to come. Like that does not
cross my mind.
>> Oh man. Would you ever consider moving
to Brazil to be with your dad if it came
to that?
>> As much as I would love to stay here and
be like, "Yeah, my family is going to
reunite in Brazil." It can't be a plan
due to the fact that my parents have
worked way too damn hard. too many years
of their damn life to come here.
>> I will be continuing college. And if
anything, I will be continuing their
success times that by 100. I refuse to
believe that they'll be throwing that
away. And if I can even continue my
dad's company to keep going and get
other people to manage it, I will be
continuing to making their name. It's
one thing to take
>> my dad away from me. It's another to
take everything that they worked hard
for.
I wanted to ask, you know, what do you
make of the fact that for a lot of
Americans, your father's story, while
sympathetic, might at the end of the day
feel like, yeah, he ultimately was here,
not legally. What would you say to those
people who might agree with the
administration's policies to remove
people like your dad who don't have
documentation here? I'd get it if you're
talking about a murderer that doesn't
belong here and he's just out running on
the street or I'd get that. But if
you're okay with separating families
because they're just simply immigrants,
that's a battle you're dealing within
yourself. If they're hearing my story
specifically, I hope they hear that and
that they try to picture one of their
daughters sitting here and having to
talk about their one of their parents
like this because somebody out there is
wishing that on somebody else. And I
just really want them to picture that.
You mentioned you spent most of your
life envisioning a future with your dad
and going into business with your dad.
Given everything that's happened, what
is that dream now?
>> Um, as of right now, there's like no
dream, no goal. It's just like, okay,
well, my dream is to kind of just be
able to push through this.
>> Have you dreamt about reuniting with
your dad, on the other hand? That's been
my little Idel dream since February
26th. [snorts] Just me getting that call
of being told, "Go pick up your dad."
[music] And all I could think of is me
just like parking my car, getting out my
car. [music]
He's standing outside like quite
literally the same exact person he left
like in his work clothes just the way he
is with his face like his regular face.
>> M like no time had passed.
>> No. Like literally no time has passed
but it feels like life spent upside
down.
>> Yeah. [music]
>> And just hugging my dad and all I could
literally do is cry. like cry my literal
heart out. Like everything that I've
been holding in like within these two
[snorts] months is that's exactly how I
see. [music] It just feels like it's
going to happen and it's all I think
about. That's all I can envision like
over and over again every single day
that I wake up. And it's just me. Like
it's not like my mom's around, my
sister's around. It's just like me and
my dad.
>> [music]
>> Isa never got the call to pick up her
dad. Instead, a few days after we had
talked, she received news that her dad
[music] had been deported from the US to
Brazil.
So, Isla packed a small suitcase for
herself [music] and a bigger one for her
dad, and she booked a ticket for one to
Brazil. And on Tuesday morning at the
arrivals terminal in Bella Orizanchi
airport,
Isa [music] finally got to be with her
dad.
After [music] the break, senior producer
Jessica Chong on what happened after Isa
reunited with her father.
Once you go through all the tunnel and
everything, it's literally like a
storefront door, like a sliding door. It
just slides and like there behind that
door. And I literally see him like
standing in front of the door. I gave
him a big hug. Like I missed him so
much. It was so shocking. It's just
like, what am I doing in Brazil? That
was like such a weird moment where it's
just like I'm so happy to see him, but
I'm in shock. I'm like, what are we
doing here? I guess this is it. Like,
this is how things are for now.
>> I guess that the feeling you're
describing is that you don't feel like
you belong there in Brazil.
>> Yeah.
>> Relationship wise and treating each
other completely normal.
>> Mhm.
>> For me, it was definitely that feeling
of like every day that I would wake up,
it would be so weird. It's like it's hot
there. It's tropical.
I don't belong here. I don't belong
here. This is not where my dad's
supposed to be. This is not where I'm
supposed to be waking up. And like time
to see my dad adjust there too is very
weird to me. [snorts]
It feels like he's like on a like
vacation that there's no end date to.
M is there specific things you saw that
like triggered you into thinking I'm not
supposed to be here? Is it like the
smell of I don't know the air?
>> Seeing it was actually like seeing
things seeing my dad with his brothers.
I've never seen that a day in my life
cuz he has four of them actually
>> was very weird to me and I couldn't like
grasp it. They're just talking. they
have like so much to catch up on within
years. And it's not that he doesn't
belong obviously that's his family but
like that is you know not his family
family like we're his family like his
future wives here. [music]
>> So seeing my dad like sitting there with
the past as if they're little and you
know the present is somewhere else. It
literally feels like he's catching up on
the past and in [music] my opinion not
going anywhere.
You mentioned that you wanted when we
last talked to work with your dad and
that the dream was to start a company to
design and build places and I guess I
wonder if that's still the plan. If you
feel like that dream is still possible
in some way.
>> I definitely feel like the dream is
powerful. There is change of plans
unfortunately.
>> Mhm.
>> But that doesn't mean I can't continue
his legacy. And my dad definitely didn't
come here for I believe 20 or 24 years
of his life here. Build all this and
give up.
It's a little crazy to say, but that
actually made me a little bit more
determined. Like it makes me work harder
because [music] he's not here.
I do co-ops. I work full-time. you know,
ever since [music] life took a big turn
financial wise. So, I'm always
constantly working when I'm not in
school. It It's a very busy life. I just
work.
>> I just work and go to school. And the
cycle repeats every single day.
[music] I kind of took this as a sign of
like I need to get up and kind of do my
own thing, build my life. I [music]
can't depend on my parents like they're
always there for moral support. Phone
call away, but I need to grow up.
I put my foot on the ground and say,
"Well, I got to make the best of it."
Today's episode was reported [music] and
produced by Jessica Chung. It was edited
by Michael Benois and Jodie Becker
[music] with help from Ben Calhoun. It
was fact checked by Susan Lee, [music]
contains music by Dan Powell, Pat
McCusker, Alicia, Will Reed, and Marian
Lozano, [music]
and was engineered by Alyssa Moxley,
Rowan Yamisto, and Chris Wood.
That's [music] it for the daily. I'm
Michael Bubaro. See you tomorrow.